Setting up a chatmail relay
===========================

This section contains everything needed to setup a ready-to-use chatmail relay.
The automated setup is designed and optimized for providing chatmail
addresses for immediate permission-free onboarding through chat apps and bots.
Chatmail addresses are automatically created at first login,
after which the initially specified password is required
for sending and receiving messages through them.


Minimal requirements and prerequisites
--------------------------------------

You will need the following:

-  Control over a domain through a DNS provider of your choice.

-  A Debian 12 **deployment server** with reachable SMTP/SUBMISSIONS/IMAPS/HTTPS ports.
   IPv6 is encouraged if available. Chatmail relay servers only require
   1GB RAM, one CPU, and perhaps 10GB storage for a few thousand active
   chatmail addresses.

-  A Linux or Unix **build machine** with key-based SSH access to the root
   user of the deployment server.
   You must add a passphrase-protected private key to your local ssh-agent because you
   can’t type in your passphrase during deployment.
   (An ed25519 private key is required due to an `upstream bug in
   paramiko <https://github.com/paramiko/paramiko/issues/2191>`_)


Setup with ``scripts/cmdeploy``
-------------------------------------

We use ``chat.example.org`` as the chatmail domain in the following
steps. Please substitute it with your own domain.

1. Setup the initial DNS records for your deployment server.
   The following is an example in the
   familiar BIND zone file format with a TTL of 1 hour (3600 seconds).
   Please substitute your domain and IP addresses.

   ::

       chat.example.org. 3600 IN A 198.51.100.5
       chat.example.org. 3600 IN AAAA 2001:db8::5
       www.chat.example.org. 3600 IN CNAME chat.example.org.
       mta-sts.chat.example.org. 3600 IN CNAME chat.example.org.

   .. note::

      For experimental deployments using self-signed certificates,
      use a domain name starting with ``_``
      (e.g. ``_chat.example.org``).
      The ``mta-sts`` CNAME and ``_mta-sts`` TXT records
      are not needed for such domains.

2. On your local PC, clone the repository and bootstrap the Python
   virtualenv.

   ::

       git clone https://github.com/chatmail/relay
       cd relay
       scripts/initenv.sh

3. On your local build machine (PC), create a chatmail configuration file
   ``chatmail.ini``:

   ::

       scripts/cmdeploy init chat.example.org  # <-- use your domain

   To use self-signed TLS certificates
   instead of Let's Encrypt,
   use a domain name starting with ``_``
   (e.g. ``scripts/cmdeploy init _chat.example.org``).
   Domains starting with ``_`` cannot obtain WebPKI certificates,
   so self-signed mode is derived automatically.
   This is useful for private or test deployments.
   See the :doc:`overview`
   for details on certificate provisioning.

4. Verify that SSH root login to the deployment server server works:

   ::

       ssh root@chat.example.org  # <-- use your domain

5. From your local build machine, setup and configure the remote deployment server:

   ::

       scripts/cmdeploy run

   This script will also check that you have all necessary DNS records.
   If DNS records are missing, it will recommend which you should
   configure at your DNS provider (it can take some time until they are
   public).

Other helpful commands
----------------------

To check the status of your deployment server running the chatmail service:

::

   scripts/cmdeploy status

To display and check all recommended DNS records:

::

   scripts/cmdeploy dns

To test whether your chatmail service is working correctly:

::

   scripts/cmdeploy test

To measure the performance of your chatmail service:

::

   scripts/cmdeploy bench



Modifying the home page
-----------------------

``cmdeploy run`` also creates default static web pages and deploys them
to a Nginx web server with:

-  a default ``index.html`` along with a QR code that users can click to
   create an address on your chatmail relay

-  a default ``info.html`` that is linked from the home page

-  a default ``policy.html`` that is linked from the home page

All ``.html`` files are generated by the according markdown ``.md`` file
in the ``www/src`` directory.

Refining the web pages
----------------------

::

   scripts/cmdeploy webdev

This starts a local live development cycle for chatmail web pages:

-  uses the ``www/src/page-layout.html`` file for producing static HTML
   pages from ``www/src/*.md`` files

-  continously builds the web presence reading files from ``www/src``
   directory and generating HTML files and copying assets to the
   ``www/build`` directory.

-  Starts a browser window automatically where you can “refresh” as
   needed.

Custom web pages
----------------

You can skip uploading a web page by setting ``www_folder=disabled`` in
``chatmail.ini``.

If you want to manage your web pages outside this git repository, you
can set ``www_folder`` in ``chatmail.ini`` to a custom directory on your
computer. ``cmdeploy run`` will upload it as the server’s home page, and
if it contains a ``src/index.md`` file, will build it with hugo.


Disable automatic address creation
--------------------------------------------------------

If you need to stop address creation, e.g. because some script is wildly
creating addresses, login with ssh to the deployment machine and run:

::

       touch /etc/chatmail-nocreate

Chatmail address creation will be denied while this file is present.


Running a relay with self-signed certificates
----------------------------------------------

Use a domain name starting with ``_`` (e.g. ``_chat.example.org``)
to run a relay with self-signed certificates.
Domains starting with ``_`` cannot obtain WebPKI certificates
so the relay automatically uses self-signed certificates
and all other relays will accept connections from it
without requiring certificate verification.
This is useful for experimental setups and testing.

Migrating to a new build machine
----------------------------------

To move or add a build machine,
clone the relay repository on the new build machine, and copy the ``chatmail.ini`` file from the old build machine.
Make sure ``rsync`` is installed, then initialize the environment:

::

   ./scripts/initenv.sh

Run safety checks before a new deployment:

::

   ./scripts/cmdeploy dns
   ./scripts/cmdeploy status

If you keep multiple build machines (ie laptop and desktop), keep ``chatmail.ini`` in sync between
them.
